---
id: 126
title: Lump Sum
date: 2008-07-20T23:52:32+00:00
author: admin
layout: post
guid: http://shobhadeepaksingh.com/?p=126
permalink: /2008/07/20/lump-sum/
---
Most of us invest money in lottery, real estate and obtain annuities but all of them provide us with the money at a very slow installments. Last year I had to purchase a land that was offered to me at a greatly subsidized price and I did not have the money to pay for ti upfront.t Even though my income streams were strong enough to provide me with the money I need within a year, I did not have a lump sum to pay off for the land. This cased sop much problems since I could have easily made a great amount of money if I purchased the land. In such a situations I was looking out for some lump sum payment company who can provide me with the money upfront so that I can purchase this land. I tried many lump sum providers who could help me in the situation and finally came across stone street capital company who provided me with the easiest and the best solution for the problem. They provided me a lump sum equivalent to what I wanted based on my annuities and offered to help me further. They are a great company who can help you with structured settlements for your immediate needs and they will be automatically repaid by you income streams. It is a great timely help to be given with a lump sum in exchange of your anticipated future incomes. If you had won a lottery , you can exchange it for cash from them since that will help you with your immediate needs like, buying a house and many other things that you want to do immediately.

On their website you can get a free quote of the lump sum you might expect based on your lotteries, annuities and real estate. With their experienced professional assistance they can really help you when you are in a real crisis and need.